---
layout: post
title:      " Writing with Robots"
date:       2018-03-28 16:24:14 -0400
permalink:  writing_with_robots
---


Why do I want to become a developer? The short answer is, because it's fun.  And because I finally believe that I can. 

In her 2004 article for *The American Scholar,* "[The Scientific Method: Dining with Robots](https://www.jstor.org/stable/41221351?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)," Ellen Ullman describes the experience of her first programming class. When I first read this article as an undergrad at the University of Colorado Denver, I was struck by three things. First, that what she was saying fascinating: our mechanization as a culture and desire for sterilized order suggests that we are becoming more like machines, rather than (or in addition to) them becoming like us. But what resonated with me more was that Ullman was an English major, a woman, and a programmer. And she described programming in a way that was relatable to me.

At the time, I was working toward my BA in English Writing. I had taken a course called "Technology and Culture" to fill a core curriculum requirement. It was intimidating because it was from the Engineering department(!), and I had a dubious relationship with things I considered technical. It's hard to explain why. In high school, I loved my physics classes and was approached by the instructor to take his electronics courses, but sadly, at the time, I had the impression that electronics and anything even slightly mechanical or technical was only for really smart guys who played video games. Not me.

That began to change when I took "Technology and Culture" and then when I became a TA for those courses. (Shout out to Dr. Tang!)

In the first units of the course, we learned about the history of the internet. This blew my mind. It had never occured to me  to wonder about how technologies like this developed, or to investigate the social and political nuance that influences development and implementation. Arnold Pacey's idea that "[technology is not neutral](https://www.amazon.com/Culture-Technology-MIT-Press/dp/0262660563)" was paradigm-shifting for me, and has colored the way I view technological development ever since: to be fiercely user-focused and to take into account social and cultural factors as well.

In the last unit of the course, we learned about contributions of minority figures in technology. That is where I met Ellen. I was impressed and fascinated that a fellow English major could become a programmer. I wanted to do that too...but I still felt like I wasn't technically-minded enough to pursue programming. 

After I graduated, I enrolled in a graduate program for eLearning Design and Development. It felt somewhat technical, and "[close to the machine](https://www.amazon.com/Close-Machine-Technophilia-Its-Discontents/dp/1250002486)," but still tied closely enough to the humanities for me to feel like I belonged. At the same time, I got a job as a media/tech aide at an elementary school. My job was to help with library check out, be the first point of contact for technical support at the school, and to teach computer classes for K-2 graders. I was inching my way closer to technology. 

In my graduate program, I found that I was more interested in learning about programming that I was about instructional design, so I dropped out to attend computer science classes at a community college. I learned about networking and operating systems. I learned about Dark Basic, C++, Java, Dos, and Unix. I was fascinated. I loved creating things that I could interact with on the screen. I loved the way it made me rethink communication. It shed light on the depth to which I assumed meaning in interactions with people, as well as machines. 

I loved breaking meaning down into parts and trying to figure out how to communicate it to a machine that didn't know anything until I taught something. I loved that it challeneged me to say exactly what I meant. In short, I loved the pure grammar of it. I realized that I was a more technically-minded English major than I thought, and I began to see programming in the context of linguistics (which was my first declared major) and that made it seem much more approachable.

One day, at the elementary school, we had a Dell Optilex 330 with a blue screen of death. I had Googled as much as I could to figure out the issue, but nothing was working. I called the Help Desk and a technician came over. He was genial and eager to show me what to look for and what to try. He crouched down and unplugged the tower and popped off the side panel of the machine.  My mind was blown again. I'm not sure what I expected to see, but I know that I expected the magical innards of a computer to be much more dense and entwined and complicated. Maybe oozing with metallic fluid. 

He blew out the dust bunnies from the fan, pointed out each part, and reseated the ram. Then, he put the side back on and plugged everything back in. We turned it back on and voila! Windows loaded; no more scary white words splattered across the screen. I had never seen the inside of a machine before, and I didn't expect it to be organized into such discrete, functional parts. It turned out, computers weren't really that complicated to understand at all. 

I started reading a book called *[Code](https://www.amazon.com/Code-Language-Computer-Hardware-Software/dp/0735611319)*  and became fascinated that simple binary choices could build on each other to create an operating system, the internet, and virtual worlds complete with beautiful graphics and sounds. (It's still amazing to me.) I learned how to be a great Googler and solved a lot of hardware issues at our school, and when a computer technician position opened up at the district office, I applied...just to see. Much to my surprise, I got the job.

I worked as a technician for six years. In addition to repairing/setting up devices and providing technical support to schools, I also administered our websites, and eventually, our LMS. I got to be a part of our implementation and went to InstructureCon (for Canvas LMS) two summers. There, I learned about all kinds of amazing customizations and API tools that we could use to make things more efficient (and fun!) I was introduced to APIs, Json, JavaScript and Ruby and there were so many things I wanted to make and do, but just didn't have the time or the fundamental knowledge to implement my ideas. I started longing to spend more time working on things like that, but the role of technician was the primary focus of that job. I also started contract work as a webmaster and fell in love with the idea of working with the web full time.

After a lot of consideration, and after starting the JavaScript Bootcamp at Flatiron, I was ready to take a leap. I quit my job and enrolled in the online web developer program. So far it's been the best decision I've ever made. It is challenging and rewarding....and so much fun. I'm so grateful for this time and for all of the experiences that have led me to this point. It's awesome to look back and see how each period in my life helped me grow more confident in my ability to create and to code.  I can't wait to learn and grow even more!  And I hope one day to be able to encourage other women, English majors, or non-gamers alike in their ability to do anything...even writing with robots!
